=pod

=head1 NAME

CGI::Tiny - Common Gateway Interface, with no frills

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use strict;
  use warnings;
  use CGI::Tiny;

  cgi {
    my ($cgi) = @_;
    $cgi->set_error_handler(sub {
      my ($cgi, $error) = @_;
      warn $error;
      $cgi->render(json => {error => 'Internal Error'}) unless $cgi->headers_rendered;
    });
    my $method = $cgi->method;
    my $fribble;
    if ($method eq 'GET') {
      $fribble = $cgi->query_param('fribble');
    } elsif ($method eq 'POST') {
      $fribble = $cgi->body_param('fribble');
    } else {
      $cgi->set_response_status(405);
      return $cgi->render;
    }
    die "Invalid fribble parameter" unless length $fribble;
    $cgi->render(json => {fribble => $fribble});
  };

=head1 DESCRIPTION

CGI::Tiny provides a modern interface to write
L<CGI|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Gateway_Interface> scripts to
dynamically respond to HTTP requests. It is intended to be:

=over

=item * Minimal

CGI::Tiny contains a small amount of code and (on modern Perls) no non-core
requirements. No framework needed.

=item * Simple

CGI::Tiny is straightforward to use, avoids anything magical or surprising, and
provides easy access to the most commonly needed features.

=item * Robust

CGI::Tiny's interface is designed to help the developer avoid common pitfalls
and vulnerabilities by default.

=item * Lazy

CGI::Tiny only loads code or processes information once it is needed, so simple
requests can be handled without unnecessary overhead.

=item * Restrained

CGI::Tiny is designed for the CGI protocol which executes the program again for
every request. It is not suitable for persistent protocols like FastCGI or
PSGI.

=item * Flexible

CGI::Tiny can be used with other modules to handle tasks like routing and
templating, and doesn't impose unnecessary constraints to reading input or
rendering output.

=back

=head1 USAGE

=for Pod::Coverage cgi

CGI::Tiny's interface is a regular function called C<cgi> exported by default.

  cgi {
    my ($cgi) = @_;
    ...
  };

The code block is immediately run and passed a CGI::Tiny object, which
L</"METHODS"> can be called on to read request information and render a
response.

If an exception is thrown within the code block, or the code block does not
render a response, it will run the handler set by L</"set_error_handler"> if
any, or by default C<warn> the error and (if nothing has been rendered yet)
render a 500 Internal Server Error.

=head1 METHODS

The following methods can be called on the CGI::Tiny object provided to the
C<cgi> code block.

=head2 set_error_handler

  $cgi = $cgi->set_error_handler(sub {
    my ($cgi, $error) = @_;
    ...
  });

Sets an error handler to run in the event of an exception. If the response
status has not been set by L</"set_response_status"> or rendering headers, it
will default to 500 when this handler is called.

The error value can be any exception thrown by Perl or user code. It should
generally not be included in any response rendered to the client, but instead
warned or logged.

Exceptions may occur before or after response headers have been rendered, so
error handlers should render some response if L</"headers_rendered"> is
false. If no response has been rendered after the error handler completes, the
default 500 Internal Server Error response will be rendered.

=head2 request_body_limit

  my $limit = $cgi->request_body_limit;

Limit in bytes for parsing a request body into memory, defaults to the value of
the C<CGI_TINY_REQUEST_BODY_LIMIT> environment variable or 16777216 (16 MiB).
Since the request body is not read until needed, reaching the limit while
parsing the request body will throw an exception. A value of 0 will remove the
limit (not recommended unless you have other safeguards on memory usage).

=head2 set_request_body_limit

  $cgi = $cgi->set_request_body_limit(16*1024*1024);

Sets L</"request_body_limit">.

=head2 headers_rendered

  my $bool = $cgi->headers_rendered;

Returns true if response headers have been rendered, such as by the first call
to L</"render">.

=head2 auth_type

=head2 content_length

=head2 content_type

=head2 gateway_interface

=head2 path_info

=head2 path_translated

=head2 query_string

=head2 remote_addr

=head2 remote_host

=head2 remote_ident

=head2 remote_user

=head2 request_method

=head2 script_name

=head2 server_name

=head2 server_port

=head2 server_protocol

=head2 server_software

  my $type   = $cgi->content_type;   # CONTENT_TYPE
  my $method = $cgi->request_method; # REQUEST_METHOD
  my $port   = $cgi->server_port;    # SERVER_PORT

Access to L<request meta-variables|https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3875#section-4.1>
of the equivalent uppercase names. Since CGI does not distinguish between
missing and empty values, missing values will be normalized to an empty string.

=head2 method

=head2 path

=head2 query

  my $method = $cgi->method; # REQUEST_METHOD
  my $path   = $cgi->path;   # PATH_INFO
  my $query  = $cgi->query;  # QUERY_STRING

Short aliases for a few request meta-variables.

=head2 header

  my $value = $cgi->header('Accept');

Retrieve the value of a request header by name (case insensitive). CGI request
headers can only contain a single value, which may be combined from multiple
values.

=head2 header_names

  my $arrayref = $cgi->header_names;

Array reference of available request header names, in lowercase.

=head2 headers

  my $hashref = $cgi->headers;

Hash reference of available request header names and values. Header names are
represented in lowercase.

=head2 query_pairs

  my $pairs = $cgi->query_pairs;

Retrieve URL query string parameters as an array reference of two-element array
references.

=head2 query_params

  my $params = $cgi->query_params;

Retrieve URL query string parameters as a hash reference. If a parameter name
is passed multiple times, its value will be an array reference.

=head2 query_param

  my $value = $cgi->query_param('foo');

Retrieve value of a named URL query string parameter. If the parameter name is
passed multiple times, returns the last value. Use L</"query_param_array"> to
get multiple values of a parameter.

=head2 query_param_array

  my $arrayref = $cgi->query_param_array('foo');

Retrieve values of a named URL query string parameter as an array reference.

=head2 body

  my $bytes = $cgi->body;

Retrieve the request body as bytes.

Note that this will read the whole request body into memory, so make sure the
L</"request_body_limit"> can fit well within the available memory.

=head2 body_pairs

  my $pairs = $cgi->body_pairs;

Retrieve C<x-www-form-urlencoded> body parameters as an array reference of
two-element array references.

Note that this will read the whole request body into memory, so make sure the
L</"request_body_limit"> can fit well within the available memory.

=head2 body_params

  my $params = $cgi->body_params;

Retrieve C<x-www-form-urlencoded> body parameters as a hash reference. If a
parameter name is passed multiple times, its value will be an array reference.

Note that this will read the whole request body into memory, so make sure the
L</"request_body_limit"> can fit well within the available memory.

=head2 body_param

  my $value = $cgi->body_param('foo');

Retrieve value of a named C<x-www-form-urlencoded> body parameter. If the
parameter name is passed multiple times, returns the last value. Use
L</"body_param_array"> to get multiple values of a parameter.

Note that this will read the whole request body into memory, so make sure the
L</"request_body_limit"> can fit well within the available memory.

=head2 body_param_array

  my $arrayref = $cgi->body_param_array('foo');

Retrieve values of a named C<x-www-form-urlencoded> body parameter as an array
reference.

Note that this will read the whole request body into memory, so make sure the
L</"request_body_limit"> can fit well within the available memory.

=head2 body_json

  my $data = $cgi->body_json;

Decode an C<application/json> request body from UTF-8-encoded JSON.

Note that this will read the whole request body into memory, so make sure the
L</"request_body_limit"> can fit well within the available memory.

=head2 set_response_status

  $cgi = $cgi->set_response_status(404);

Sets the response HTTP status code. No effect after response headers have been
rendered. The CGI protocol assumes a status of C<200 OK> if no response status
is set.

=head2 set_response_content_type

  $cgi = $cgi->set_response_content_type('application/xml');

Sets the response Content-Type header, to override autodetection. No effect
after response headers have been rendered.

=head2 set_response_header

  $cgi = $cgi->set_response_header('Content-Disposition' => 'attachment');

Sets a response header. No effect after response headers have been rendered.

An array reference value will set the header once for each value.

Note that header names are case insensitive and CGI::Tiny does not attempt to
deduplicate or munge headers that have been set manually.

=head2 response_charset

  my $charset = $cgi->response_charset;

Charset to use when rendering C<text> or C<html> response data, defaults to
C<UTF-8>.

=head2 set_response_charset

  $cgi = $cgi->set_response_charset('UTF-8');

Sets L</"response_charset">.

=head2 render

  $cgi->render(html => $html);
  $cgi->render(text => $text);
  $cgi->render(data => $bytes);
  $cgi->render(json => $ref);
  $cgi->render(redirect => $url);

Renders response data of a type indicated by the first parameter. The first
time it is called will render response headers, and it may be called additional
times with more response data.

The C<Content-Type> response header will be set according to
L</"set_response_content_type">, or autodetected depending on the data type
passed in the first call to C<render>, or to C<application/octet-stream> if
there is no more appropriate value.

C<html> or C<text> data is expected to be decoded characters, and will be
encoded according to L</"response_charset">. C<json> data will be encoded to
UTF-8.

C<redirect> will print a redirection header if response headers have not yet
been rendered, and will set a response status of 302 if none has been set by
L</"set_response_status">. It will not set a C<Content-Type> response header.
If response headers have already been rendered a warning will be emitted.

=head1 CAVEATS

CGI is an extremely simplistic protocol and relies particularly on the global
state of environment variables and the C<STDIN> and C<STDOUT> standard
filehandles. CGI::Tiny does not prevent you from messing with these interfaces
directly, but it may result in confusion.

Most applications are better written in a L<PSGI>-compatible framework (e.g.
L<Dancer2> or L<Mojolicious>) and deployed in a persistent application server
so that the application does not have to start up again every time it receives
a request.

=head1 TODO

=over

=item * Uploads/multipart request

=item * Cookies

=back

=head1 BUGS

Report any issues on the public bugtracker.

=head1 AUTHOR

Dan Book <dbook@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This software is Copyright (c) 2021 by Dan Book.

This is free software, licensed under:

  The Artistic License 2.0 (GPL Compatible)

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<CGI::Alternatives>, L<Mojolicious>, L<Dancer2>

=cut
